+++
title = "The Investor's Dilemma"
date = 2024-02-16
draft = false
+++

Since 2008, a major theme on Wall Street has been a [major shift in the business models](https://hbr.org/2017/10/how-the-great-recession-changed-banking) of the largest investment banks. Dodd-Frank is responsible for a lot of these changes, along with nearly all of the major investment banks opting to turn themselves into bank holding companies to borrow directly from the Fed. Before the crisis, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, and their ilk were deep into risky and volatile business, like running in-house hedge funds and lending money to risky companies, generally without much scrutiny. But the financial crisis changed all of this, and regulators decided that they’d rather these firms not do these things, instead pushing them toward [predictable, boring businesses](https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2018/01/25/morgan-stanleys-unexciting-model-takes-the-prize-on-wall-street) like wealth management and commercial banking. 

Coincidentally, it was around this time that the internet and digital payments were starting to work well enough to be useful, which brought the [first wave of fintech companies](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesfinancecouncil/2017/03/07/fintechs-next-wave/?sh=364d220163a3) onto the scene to let small businesses accept payments through websites and cheap devices at their storefronts. The bigger banks, generally slow to innovate and reeling from the financial crisis, spent the last decade catching up. Goldman Sachs launched their consumer product, [Marcus](https://www.insiderintelligence.com/content/how-marcus-met-its-end-2022), and a co-branded card with Apple, Morgan Stanley bought [eTrade](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/02/20/heres-why-morgan-stanley-is-spending-13-billion-to-buy-e-trade.html), and [JP Morgan went out and bought 40 fintech companies](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/jpmorgan-chase-fintech-buying-spree-105341276.html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAANdXxKBNPiVeUSc2WbSJDQHy1rcLiFixIaJuzjtJBtXs8h_RMQs_V2a785zhy0wBHkrbF1BBcwY3R2kbB17GZ2itrRW4z214Pee2D5U2dcTnvdFF3Pcq2TvGqWS7LeZMUN8II7GyxkSntvnl956HYXqgQofNcZpetUkHG7Uzhuu4). 

That’s a lot of companies! JP Morgan would really love nothing more than to own every piece of the payments stack, including (1) your bank account, (2) the card you use to pay for stuff, (3) the terminal the merchant uses to accept your payment, and (4) the bank account of the merchant who accepts your payment. Payments is a really boring business to be in, and that on its own is not too exciting for anyone to own every aspect of—[interchange fees](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/i/interchange-rate.asp) are very small relative to the cost of the infrastructure required to own all those parts in the system. The exciting part for JP Morgan is the other things you can sell once you have all those pieces in place, especially on the merchant side. There are many, many more small business out there than large ones, and very few of them are paying JP Morgan much money for financial services (yet). Checking account and cash management aren’t much more exciting than payments and, if anything, run a net loss for the bank. 

Lending, though… Lending can be lots of fun for someone like JP Morgan. Once you already have a merchant keeping their cash with you and using your payments apps, you both know a lot more than anybody else about their financial health AND have a direct way to very easily ask them if they’d like a little extra cash. Proprietary financial data on millions of businesses is worth a lot more than the checking accounts. 

This is what JP Morgan excels at and has been doing for 100+ years. Ivy League undergraduates who apply to “banking” jobs at JP Morgan don’t usually intend to underwrite risk on an Albanian footwear manufacturer’s loans, but that’s the biggest needle-mover for a global bank in 2024—a desire to own every financial service used by every individual and business in the world. And that’s largely the reason why they’re [losing ~$450 million per year](https://www.bankingdive.com/news/jpmorgan-investor-day-net-interest-income-return-tangible-common-equity-uk-digital-bank-heloc/624208/) on international expansion and billions more on acquisitions. 

Most of these acquisitions were completed in 2021, when fintech was still a hot industry and people mostly didn’t worry about the paltry margins on payments infrastructure. Some of these acquisitions (presumably) are going okay; others not so much.  

The first of these was [Frank](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/frank-founder-accused-defrauding-jpmorgan-says-governments-scheduling-rcna88483), a financial aid startup they [acquired in 2021 for $175 million](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20210921005169/en/JPMorgan-Chase-Acquires-Frank-the-Leading-College-Financial-Planning-Platform-for-Students). Frank was part of a cadre of consumer fintechs (see [Dave](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dave_(company)), [Marcus](https://en.wikipedia.org/?title=Marcus_by_Goldman_Sachs&redirect=no), [Oscar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oscar_Health)) in the late 2010s that tried to win over financially unenthusiastic millennials by naming startups after their grandfathers. The idea behind Frank, which is not so important in this story, was to simplify college financial aid for college students, which would, I guess, give JP Morgan great data on already-indebted college students, so that they could sell them more debt? 

The result, which is more important, is that JP Morgan and Frank founder [Charlies Javice](https://www.forbes.com/profile/charlie-javice/?sh=606a3a09619c) ended up suing each other over allegedly fake user counts that Javice presented to them during due diligence. She claimed she had 4.25 million users, when she only had fewer than 300,000. JP Morgan began looking into this after attempting to email the provided customer list and finding that more than half of the emails bounced back. The end result is an ongoing and [highly entertaining lawsuit](https://assets.bwbx.io/documents/users/iqjWHBFdfxIU/rNlNVTl.6yh8/v0) over what exactly JP Morgan was led to believe about that customer list. 

Anyways, now JP Morgan is both being sued by and counter-suing another fintech they bought in their 2021 shopping spree, [this time in Europe](https://www.pymnts.com/legal/2024/viva-wallet-ceo-accuses-jpmorgan-of-stunting-company-growth/):

> The CEO and founder of a fintech co-owned by JPMorgan Chase is suing the bank for allegedly trying to impede company growth, the [Financial Times reported Thursday](https://www.ft.com/content/4884fe6b-1874-455c-9388-34b8d861aa11).
> 
> 
> Viva Wallet, a Greek fintech in which JPMorgan has held a 48.5% stake since 2022, is being blocked from entry in the U.S. and some European markets in an effort to keep its valuation down, Viva Wallet CEO Haris Karonis alleged in documents filed in London’s High Court and seen by the publication.
> 
> Karonis also alleged that JPMorgan’s payments business is allowed to compete with Viva in some markets, further limiting growth, according to the report.
> 

Viva Wallet was founded in 1999 by Haris Karonis in Athens to provide basic financial infrastructure for small businesses. Not much happened for a while and then they hit it big with the first wave of fintechs. Unlike the U.S., each region is Europe has completely different banking practices, rules, and supervision, which makes it hard for banks to operate across country borders. Viva Wallet, by focusing on being a technology provider, was able to spread across 24 countries, providing tools for merchants to accept payments easily, like tap-to-pay smartphone apps that transfer funds into a cloud-based wallet, rather than physical bank accounts. Viva became the largest Greek fintech ever. JP Morgan would like to access Viva’s customers and offer them loans and other financial products, so they decided that they would buy half the business. Also, Takis Georgakopoulos, JP Morgan’s head of payments, and Jamie Dimon, its CEO, have strong ties to Greece, which [they insist has nothing to do with their reasons for doing the deal](https://www.ekathimerini.com/opinion/interviews/1176840/i-had-no-doubt-there-was-talent-here/). 

But there is a catch:

> JPMorgan [bought its stake in Viva for €800 million in 2022](https://www.bankingdive.com/news/jpmorgan-buys-49-stake-in-greek-fintech-viva-wallet/617685/). The terms of the deal state that JPMorgan will be allowed to take full control of Viva is [sic] the value falls below €5 billion in June 2025…
> 
> 
> Now, however, the fintech and the bank are at odds, with Karonis’ holding company, WRL, challenging the details of JPMorgan’s option to purchase Viva because they create “perverse incentives” for JPMorgan to limit Viva’s growth. JPMorgan executives, on the other hand, don’t think Karonis understands that valuations of fintechs like his own have plummeted in the past two years, people familiar with the bank’s legal approach told the Financial Times.
> 
> JPMorgan also filed a claim against Karonis over alleged efforts to “limit or circumvent our contractual and legal rights as an investor,” sources told the publication.
> 
> The two firms also don’t see eye to eye on Viva’s valuation: JPMorgan and its valuer, Houlihan Lokey, value Viva, which operates in 24 countries, at €1 billion, while Viva’s valuer, EY, asserts it’s worth €3 billion.
> 

Of course Houlihan Lokey and EY don’t agree! That’s why each side is paying them! Without more context, it’s really hard to understand why both sides would agree to this deal in the first place. Karonis obviously doesn’t want the valuation to be below €5 billion at the cutoff date in 2025, as he’d lose control over the company he’s spent the last two decades building—his life’s work. JP Morgan, on the other hand, very much would like for the valuation to fall below €5 billion, as they’d get the whole company for half the price. Even better for JP Morgan would be if the company’s valuation technically clocked in below €5 billion right at the cutoff date, triggering the change of control, BUT the actual “true value” of the business was much greater. 

If I were JP Morgan and had no empathy for Karonis, I would first focus all my attention on making sure I win full control of Viva on the cutoff date, using my other products and 40+ fintech investments to compete ruthlessly against Viva, stunt their growth, and pummel their valuation. I would prevent them from entering new markets and let the business stagnate, all the while keeping their customer list alive and product functioning, so I can sell loans to their customers later. Then, after winning full control in June 2025, I’d put my foot on the gas and let Viva run free, now that I own all of it at no extra cost. 

This is obviously oversimplified, but it appears more or less like JP Morgan is doing exactly this? JP invested in Viva back in November 2021, when fintech was running hot, and allegedly paid more than $800 million for ~49% of Viva, which implies a $1.7 billion to $2.0 billion valuation depending on how you interpret “more than $800 million.” More than doubling that valuation in less than four years is not exactly a likely outcome, but it’s hard to know for certain what that likelihood is, ex ante. It’s also hard to know how much of the total value captured by the combined JP Morgan + Viva partnership is attributable to each entity. Viva clearly owns the revenue it generates from its own apps and terminals, while JP Morgan clearly owns the revenue that it generates from its bank accounts. The interest paid on loans that JP Morgan is now making because they have access to Viva’s merchants…well, are technically only possible because of the combined entity, even though JP Morgan on paper is earning 100% of that revenue. Perhaps there is some revenue sharing agreement with Viva, whereby Viva earns some commission for helping JP Morgan source new loan customers, but there’s a clear conflict of interest there in the presence of the valuation clause. 

Also, it’d be interesting to know how exactly the valuation will be determined on the cutoff date. JP Morgan is so vast that any independent third party, on the margin, will probably be inclined to lean more toward JP Morgan’s preferred valuation than Viva’s. JP Morgan advises thousands of companies, and if the independent third party auditor doesn’t play ball, they may advise those companies to stop using that auditor. Again, there are a lot of unknown details that would be more interesting if they were known, but it all begs the question of why do the deal like this in the first place. 

The point of strategic investing for big companies is that it’s hard to build new products yourself, especially if you’re a big, slow-moving company with a nosy and pestering regulator. But if you want to sell financial services to every man, woman, and Albanian shoemaker, more branches isn’t going to cut it! The tough part is lining up the incentives for JP Morgan to be able to sell more financial services while at the same time helping the fintech sell more of its thing. In this case, “global small/medium business payments” is too large and fractured of a market for Viva to be free from any competition from JP Morgan, especially when JP Morgan will buy Viva for 50% off if they are successful enough in competing against them. It seems like nobody got a worse deal than Haris Karonis, who now stands to lose the company he spent 25 years building. Nearly all of the shares sold in the 2021 raise came from other investors, leaving just Haris and JP Morgan as the last two co-owners of Viva. 

It’s hard to get the details right in these kinds of strategic deals. JP Morgan has a great boring banking business and that will probably never change, but they’ll happily structure deals with 40 fintech companies to get to the customers they can’t right now. Sometimes, though, the incentives won’t be quite right, and there will be lawsuits.